Hi, Tilda.
Know my heart. Am
Ida know my heart?
Am I,
Alex?
Fantastic.
Okay, excellent. Okay, so
ua, um, called Dan Bid.
Welcome to the Mafi Select Committee.
Uh, we've got representatives from across parliament here.
Um, we're really excited to have you join us, uh,
to talk about your annual, uh, review of 2023.
Um, and, uh, welcome Dr. Severn.
Uh, uh, welcome to the school kids at the back.
You're from, um, what is it, kids University. Is that right?
From Massey. You come to see how democracy works? Fantastic.
Am I This is your house.
Uh, and here we're all far, all this time. Yes, exactly.
But, uh, hope you get a lot out of this, uh, hearing.
So we've got, um, uh, doctor, about, uh,
45 minutes with you today.
Uh, feel free if you wish to open with some brief comments,
but I think we are just keen to have a good quarter
with you about how things are going, um, in your role and,
and in your organization and what the challenges
and opportunities are, uh, for this area.
So over to you. Uh, I,
Um, in front of you, you have, um, two handouts
because this is the first time
that we're in front of the committee.
I thought it was important to just give you a bit
of a general background on the Maori trustee, the office
of the Maori trustee to reply all
and some of our legal context.
And then the second handout is, um, thank you
so much speaks directly to the annual report, 2223.
And, uh, if you have any outstanding questions on 2223,
we do have the minister who was in charge of that portfolio.
You probably read off those, those answers.
But, um, we administer 78,000 hectares
of UA Maori, and 78% will place.
80% of that land is less than 50 hectares in size.
So it's small. It's Tiger Country.
A lot of it is Tiger Country.
Uh, we have the stats that show it's, it's, um, the,
we skew a lot towards category land categories 5, 6, 7,
and eight.
We have $150 million of owner's funds under management.
So that, that is the owner's money associated
with those land trusts.
And, uh, that's,
that's the highest it's been in the time, Maori trustee.
So while we have less ma land to administer,
because we off board at a reasonable rate at
around 60 trusts per year, uh, we still grow their funds
and distribute their funds.
We, um, have over 2000 advisory trustees.
So when a determination is made by the court, we have
advisory trustees who, who aid me in decision making
and who, who are the ones that we work
with when we are offboarding the,
the management administration,
and finally the governance of the land.
And I meet with them annually. Those advisory trustees.
Um, the Maori trustee itself, it's, um, one
of the principal vehicles
through which a crown meets its objectives to UA Maori.
And it's been around for over a hundred years.
And we recently celebrated that here in Parliament.
So up until 2009, the Maori trustee was within, uh,
and that was established in 2009
and became corporation sole under the Finance Act.
And we can see that legal context.
I think most of you will know that the,
in the middle section of page one you're talking about, uh,
the, the area of UA Maori UA Maori in general is, is,
uh, 1.4 million hectares over 27
and a half thousand titles that speaks
to that fragmented nature.
The mean of that total area is 52 hectares.
So similar to my portfolio, the second, uh,
the second map shows where the Maori trustee,
uh, Corpus lands are.
And so that's just over the 78,000.
And that mean, mean title area.
I want to draw to attention to that.
Um, of UA Maori, 42% of UA Maori
is in natural forest.
And of the Maori trustees portfolio, that's 32%, so sorry,
42% Maori land in general.
And uh, 32% of, um, UA Maori.
What the trustee offers.
In terms of our, um, trustee duties,
we believe we are a trusted partner.
We have a large data, um, asset data.
So all of the responsible trustee titles
we have asset plans for,
and farm environment plans are at
probably about 90% through the farm environment plans
for those responsible trustees.
But we do, we do offer that as a service as well.
Uh, we advocate for UA Maori, you will be aware
that there is very little policy around UA Maori.
So that's quite a challenge to advocate.
Hard to see not just making submissions all the time,
but having, um, being able to contribute to policy direction
and policy making.
We do a lot in the development model space.
We have a fund off to the side,
which is the general purposes fund, which is for,
for Maori, all of Maori.
And that's where most of our development work comes out of.
So we work with agencies and we try
and make sure that as a growing fund
and not a depleting fund,
we are very good project managers.
So that's the hand on my heart.
Um, on this page two, we've got the strategic priorities,
uh, for this year.
Um, you may be aware that we, we do come in front
of you again at the beginning of December for the 24 year.
23 year, sorry, 24. Year before 24. Yeah.
Um, and so the, some of the current work
that we've got underway was around,
which was enabling UA utilization.
So that was funded through
visualizing ua.
So we were already working
across our GIS database across our land, trying to make
decisions rapidly previously.
And then of course, cyclone bowler hit
Gabriel, Gabriel, Gabriel.
Oh, so Cyclone bowler hit in the same phase as that.
It hit me with Gabriel, but Fur South
and, um, cyclone Gabriel meant that we needed
to speed up our assessment of damage on the, on our blocks.
And we were able to, um,
get orders from the Maori Land Court to, um,
provide those services to Unad administered lands
that were adjacent to our blocks that we damaged as well.
We talk a little bit more about that, um,
because it does fall into the year
of interest at the moment.
So we do work around unlocking higher
and better use for Maori land.
Some of the challenges for the Maori trustee, uh,
in the, um, the how we are funded, the sustainability
of the trustee, you'll see on page two in the bottom right,
we're appropriated to, um,
55% at the moment.
Um, we, our costs, the costs that are rising
for us are around the, just the cost of transacting business
and the increased portfolio, uh, compliance cost.
We have unclaimed monies which sit inside the common fund,
which is not the best place for them.
And Greg can talk some more to you about some
of the legisl legislative work we've tried to undertake
to have that unlocked so that we can use it.
At the moment, it's, we can't use it inside the common fund,
but that's our funding model at the moment.
The Crown contribute up around between, uh, 50
and 60% of our funding, and then we use fees
and commissions from our transactions
to make up the rest, uh, too.
Do we have any questions?
Uh, yeah, I think, um, uh, go now to general questions.
So, um, I'm looking around and, uh, um, right, honorable
Adrian.
Um, um, just wanted
to expand on that.
The last comment that you made around the funding.
And I remember, um, hearing, um, when the fund was
around 70 million,
and I wondered, you know, if you've done any work around
projecting how much of that 140 million
IT work currently sits, uh, will still be there
unplanned in 10, 20 years.
And what are the mechanisms that you might
require to unlock that to?
Um, I mean, I'm, I'm thinking about some of the issues
that come to us as politicians around getting access
to capital from some of our, um, well, lots
of Maori entities, so whatever, help us with understanding.
And I'll hand it over to the Maori deputy Maori trustee.
Good. Okay. Too. Um,
so we've got approximately 30 million, uh, money.
So that's money that, uh,
is sitting in owner accounts within the common fund,
about 65,000 separate accounts.
So some of those, uh, accounts are quite small balances
and some of them, uh, large balances.
Um, I think we get to pay out about
500,000 a year through just people, uh, connecting with us.
Uh, but the balance, uh, increases by,
I think over a million dollars a year
and probably with increased succession to Ari
and, uh, with our average age of owners coming,
we could probably see that, um,
that increase more than a million dollars a year.
So, um, projecting forward, you know, another 10, 15 years,
uh, we could be talking about, um, 50 million
rather than, and that's a rough figure, um,
rather than talking in the 30 millions in terms of,
um, your question about the, um, options
for unlocking that land
because money is scarce at the moment
and looking at the potential that the, what you want to,
what we want to do is to ensure
that owners have the same level of protections
that they currently have to be able to claim that money,
while at the same time being able to use it for the benefit
of, um, things
that we can use the general purposes fund money for.
And so there is,
we propose a legislative mechanism to achieve that.
Uh, we think that that can be achieved
because currently the, um, it's, uh, if there is a claim,
uh, for unclaimed money,
that is a claim against the common fund.
So what we would do is instead
of having a claim against the common fund,
we would have the claim against the general purpose fund.
The general purpose fund would meet any claimant's
claim to unai money.
We would transfer unclaimed money
as it would been from the common fund
into the general purposes fund.
We would record transfer balances.
We would ensure that le there was a legislative
or regulatory regulatory mechanism to, um,
pay interest on, uh, that balance from the data transfer.
Because once you transfer it out of the common fund, it,
it doesn't achieve interest from the pooled
investment in the common fund.
So we would have a, uh, you know, a mechanism whereby, uh,
interest would be paid at a,
at a certain annual rate from the date
of transfer from the common fund
to the general purposes fund to the date
that it's actually paid out to the, to the,
to the owner of that money.
We believe that that is, um, that meets the,
the fairness criteria.
It means that there is no, um, there is no loss
to particular owners.
Um, uh, that, and,
and at the same time, we can achieve the objectives
of unlocking that money
and, uh, not see the position
that we might be in in another 10
or 15 years where that we've got, you know,
50 million locked mm-Hmm.
In there. We have, um, gone out
to a light consultation with, uh,
three TVK joint effort, uh, online.
We got, um, we got various reactions to that
and another proposal we had.
I think, um, it is, um,
sometimes a little bit conceptually difficult
for people when they hear that the, the, the, the,
the mind might turn to, you know, something, um,
something's not right here.
Uh, what is the Maori trustee doing,
transferring money from, you know,
our accounts into its own accounts.
And I think, um, uh, you know,
we can have another crack certainly at trying to articulate
that, but at the same, at the same time, um, uh, I think it,
it does meet that, uh, equitable, uh, resolution
and it would certainly address it reasonably quickly if we
could get, um, good support for that
and move that along quickly.
Um, just to up on that, I mean, what's,
'cause that's quite a lot of money, how many landowners, um,
are there that, that, you know,
that $30 million is I'm paying for
and what's the average per landowner,
I'm guessing would be quite small, but,
Uh, there's six.
I think I, I think from memory, I don't have the,
the exact figure for the unclaimed,
but the, uh, um, common fund accounts that are unclaimed,
but I think it's in the region of 65,000 who
Own land Owners, 65,000, 65,000 separate, um,
accounts for an owner.
So an owner may have, um, interest coming from d different,
um, Maori land interests,
but they'll have one account into
which those interests come.
But your question around, um, average balances,
I don't think it would have $5.
$5. And yes, um,
it'll be small when you look at averages,
but like I say, there'll be, um, many that are,
have less than that and, um, be modest,
but there'll be, there'll be a number
with higher balances than that.
Hmm. Um, uh, and, and,
and some of the larger ones will be thousands rather than,
you know, um, dollars.
Yes. But we could, uh, if that level of information there,
we can certainly bring that next meeting.
Yeah, that'd be helpful. Um, yeah. Thank you.
Uh, questions members? Yes.
Uh, David
Got it.
Um, just, uh, talking about the, uh, the small quantum, uh,
for each account, uh,
and I'd imagine over time, uh, those accounts, uh, through
succession and getting more and more, um, and becoming
or having an, an effect on that quantum even getting less
and less so to speak, could, could you talk
to me about your thinking of the future of, of where
that's going and potentially, uh, some, uh, uh,
levers or thinkings of, of
how we could potentially get a better outcome than just
the increasing, uh, of the accounts and the,
and probably adversely affecting the quantum of what,
what each one of those are?
I think if I start,
and then I'll pass it on to you around the legal context.
There have been, there have been policies in the past that,
that, um, governments have come out with that have,
have looked at capping, capping the, um,
monetary value, which a, an account holder would have,
or, uh, what, what the worth of an interest is
or a distributable income.
I think the, the challenging part is
because the UA piece, the, the, the fact
that you get your mana from that land,
even if the tiniest little bit fraction
of it allows you to have a say.
But the, the reality is that accounts where you are,
where you are processing costs are higher than you,
what you are distributing, it becomes uneconomical.
And Greg can go over some of the, the legal context there
because we, we've mapped out essentially
what it looks like for the owners.
Those, those owners that sit inside the unclaimed, uh,
fund, the fund that sits in the common fund.
And we can see just with our demographics that, um,
what will happen to the, their shareholding.
So I think, um, one good solid mechanism
that can be employed to avoid, um,
um, additional money coming down into co uh,
to own accounts is for it to sit at the,
the governance level at the trust level.
'cause um, the money has, most of that money has come from,
um, a, a trust distribution.
Um, so a trust, um, makes a distribution legally.
Once that distribution is made, it,
then the money is then distributed to its owners
and the legal entitlement falls to that money to the owners.
One, one mechanism that gets employed reasonably regularly,
but could be employed more, is to
set out in a trust deed trust order for the Murray LandCorp,
um, that if, um, if money at a certain,
uh, financial level is, um, then becomes payable
to a person as a result of the distribution
that will be actually held at the trust level
and continue to be able to be used by the trust
for the benefit of, um, the trust.
Some, some of those orders, um, uh,
have provisions which basically just say
that it gets held by the trusts.
Some say that the trust can use the interest on that money.
Some say that the trust can use both the principle
and the interest and have to meet the claim of the owner
once they're located.
And some just simply say that the owner all fits the money.
So there, there are lots of different ways
that that could be done.
But the, as soon as the, as soon as the, if you don't have
that in play,
once the trust makes a distribution, all of the owners
and sometimes hundreds,
sometimes thousands will get their proportionate share.
And once, and we, if we are administering that land,
that proportionate share will come into their,
their individual's common fund account
and will will result in an increase in unclaim money
if we can't pay it out.
I just a stop on that. Um, and thank you.
And, and obviously there's another side
of this conversation about endeavoring to, uh, uh, locate
on, 'cause I is, am I correct in understanding
that the common fund is, is in
because of the fact that you,
you're not not finding home for that money?
So it's not, you know, under well
identify when it's going to, or,
Um, the common fund is primarily the account in which we
hold fiduciary money
and we, we administer one in three Maori land trust,
so approximately 1700, um, entities.
And so the, the bulk of that money is, is actually,
other than that 30,000, 30 million, 30 million rather,
is actually by do three monies that we are holding on behalf
of those Murray Land trusts.
And most of those Murray land trusts will have
inflows and outflows.
So very, it's a very unusual account.
So we, so we are principally a leasing portfolio.
We have about 1700, 1800 leases.
LEAs income comes in, we attribute that to those entities
expenses relating to those trust entities closed out.
Oh, I see. And so it's not simply, so it's
Not unpaid dividends? No,
sorry.
No, it's actually, It's just a
Block that sits there within it.
The best way to think of the common fund is it's the,
it's the working account of, of our clients.
Um, but once trusts make distributions, once those
1800 entities make distributions, we need to, um, try
to pay out those distributions to the underlying owners.
Now, we, we hold, I think contact details
for about 61%, which is actually quite good in terms of,
you know, the, the amount of, um, contactee details held
by administrators.
But, but we hold less payment, um,
bank account details than we hold contact details.
Um, and so you can see
that there are still a substantial number of, um,
underlying owners who we don't have contact with.
They don't have contact with us.
They may not know that they are owners. So where
Is that money Sitting?
That money's sitting in the common fund in those,
those common 30 million, those individual, um,
common fund accounts.
So the common fund has to hold all at the moment,
all fiduciary monies, including those that we can't pay out
to the underlying owners until we can pay it out.
And the suggestion that I've got is that it no longer needs
to sit there just simply getting the $5, getting
nominal interest income for the next 20 years
when it can be transferred to the general purposes fund
and used for those, the purposes in that,
that fund in the meantime,
while protecting the underlying rights
of those owners to, to make a claim.
And we spend a lot of time looking for owners,
and we've got a project underway at the moment,
looking at some of the architecture that sits around that,
uh, not just finding the owners,
but how the data is held in different
agencies within government.
And that's quite an exciting piece of work.
I think that will, that will lead on to actually not just us
as administrators, um, getting some benefit
from having the architecture sorted,
but actually all administrators money. Can
I just, um, pick up on one of the mechanism
that I've been hearing more about, um, in relation to,
you know, avoiding the situation where money's sort
of sitting in the unclaimed areas is, um,
I think there's this recognition that it's, um, that a lot
of the land that, certainly the land that we administer, uh,
his, um, is experiencing additional, uh, costs
of administration, uh, that it's mainly rural land
and the inputs are getting higher, the rents aren't
necessarily the lease rent rentals aren't, um, getting, uh,
uh, substantially higher.
And, um, some of them are, we already have 30% of our trust
that can't meet our base trustee fee,
which is highly subsidized,
and we are probably gonna see more of that.
But another part of the conversation that I'm hearing is,
well, um, perhaps we need to be thinking about, um,
Maori lands, landowners thinking about holding their land,
uh, differently than in anina with trust, which is sort
of based on that economic model
and more holding it, um, you know, as, um, rather than
as individuals, but as custom title.
Um, and I think we're gonna see that happen more
and it's become more popular.
The Maori land could already have the,
the legislative toolkit to allow owners to,
to hold the land in that way.
And then you don't have the sort of drive towards
economic distribution.
You just have the focuses on the ua protecting the ua,
enhancing, enhancing the ua, um,
and less, uh, also from an administrator's point of view,
it simplifies things, uh, significantly
because you don't have to be, uh, record keeping to
that sort of level, et cetera.
So, um, but I think that that's probably where, um,
we're gonna see in the next 10, 15, um, 20 years more,
more, um, you know, land being held in
that way rather than share.
I'm conscious that we are, um, on almost on time, um,
Uh, yeah, we've got about 15 minutes, so, awesome.
Um, we've just got a few questions here, so thank you, Greg.
So we've got a quick stop from you, Greg.
Yeah, no, You, you've, you've actually spoken
to exactly the question I was going to ask, which was, um,
um, your, you mentioned earlier on the, um,
the people finding mana in the, in the land, uh, stressing
how much of the conversation rather is on the economic
output I've been resting with.
How is it that you meet
that while maximizing this? I think you've just spoken to that.
Yep. Wonderful. I'll go to then. Thank you so much.
Um, I have a co a couple of questions just about how much
of the, um, 26,000 hectares of Maori land that attract
and perpetual leases do you manage?
Mm-Hmm.
I, I, um, I don't have those figures.
I think we previously presented those figures. Yeah.
Um, I don't have those figures with me today,
but we, we, we, um,
when the 1955 Maori Reserve Act came into force, we,
we were, um, managing all reserve, you know,
most all of the reserve land.
And of course since in the 1970s, eighties, a number
of the incorporations have got back, um, the responsibility
for governance of the land.
So PKW, um, Waka two, Waka two
10th trust, et cetera.
So, uh, but we still administer, um, a fair number of, um,
um, reserve land and,
and most of those lands will have perpetual,
will have leases on them subject to the, the act.
Some of them are non perpetual
and some of them perpetually renewable.
Um, thank you. And so what, like,
or if any, do you have any, um, programs in place
to examine a pathway to unlock those lands
from perpetual leases?
And I guess I'm interested in what level
of return the land owners who are locked in perpetual leases
like have to contribute,
and how much does ma, does
Maru charge land owners on average for that administration?
Just, um, so, uh,
lease administration costs is prescribed
by the Maori trustee regulations.
Um, and that sets out, um, the, that the, um,
the amount of our charge is based on amount
of rental that's received.
So, uh, I think it's 7.5%, um,
under the, under the regulations.
So the, the amount that the Maori trustee charges
for administration of the lease is, is prescribed.
And, and so, and it's only on amount actually received.
So if you have a TE tenant who's not paying their
rent, we're not, we're not
Charging, we're not charging Right.
Uh, for that. In terms of mechanisms
That we're looking at, um,
we've dis we've discussed a few.
And, um, pre-election, I did talk with a number of, of, um,
people about what, you know, what options exist.
So especially when a lease,
when a tenant wants to surrender.
So that's the time.
Now some of the reserves do have money,
so they've got money in the bank because they've been,
but many don't.
Yeah. And so for them to buy, to buy out, yeah.
That lease and improvements, um, can be
just out, out of their league.
Yeah. At all. So the, when the,
when there was a reform in the eighties, um,
money different, there was payments made out to, um,
owners and to tenants.
So there is, I think has been, um, some reticence
and actually engaging in what the, you know,
does the Crown have an obligation here?
Mm-Hmm. My my view is that, you know, we try,
we try hard, especially if there is economic return to,
to provide a loan for that.
Okay. But, um, we, we have, there are some limits to
us being able to do that.
I think if the fund was set aside,
and that fund was purely for the perpetual leases,
and we consulted on that
because remember a number of the, um,
already the reserves, those owners have paid the paid out,
paid the tenant out.
Mm-Hmm. So, you know, there is, there is some, some, um,
issues of fairness there.
Yeah. But you know, we are talking about lands
that have never really made any money.
Yeah. Mm-Hmm. And so a locked into a lease arrangement.
And I think that there are, there are opportunities
and we, we are happy to explore it.
The, the, the legislation is, is clearly with the minister
of, of Maori affairs.
Mm-Hmm. So, um, that, that sits there, that's the issue.
We are an administrator for them. Yeah. Yeah.
And they are, they are challenging to administer.
They're not a straightforward Yeah, yeah.
You know, tick the box administration,
they require a lot of work.
And so I think, um, many of the owners see us doing the work
and want to take it over and,
and we, we transition to that Mm-Hmm.
But at any stage,
they can become the named administrator Yeah.
Through A court process.
Thank you. Um, we now go to Dan Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
Thanks very much. Uh, uh, called Dan Kirkpatrick.
Um, I am from, um, the mighty t East Coast. Yes.
And, um, which is well represented on your we red dots, um,
along with other parts of the North Island specifically,
including my colleagues, uh, area up north.
Um, look, I'm interested in, I,
and I get this all the time, right, the, the potential
for Maori land, um, but the barriers
and the challenges that come, um, when people are looking
to develop or to, um, try
to do something with the Maori land.
And I am a, um, Maori land shareholder, um,
and I, some parts are of my, and I haven't even seen
because I can't get to it.
Um, so, you know, I think
what I'm interested in from you is, is the key barriers
and challenges for Maori land owners.
Um, and what solutions either are Intrain
or what do you think would be potential solutions given
if you had the opportunity to, you know,
to push forward some ideas and some things?
What, what, what would you do differently?
Great, great question.
Well, um, the mighty Tide ahead of themselves have got the,
um, trust tide fatigue group. So, and
Collective, well That's, and we're a part of that.
So Alan Harding achieve that.
That is a magnificent vehicle that I, I would like
to see replicated across the country.
What what that does is it pulls, it doesn't ask you
to agree all the time or,
but it actually means that everything that is going on
is shared in a very transparent fashion across, across those
participating groups.
And so we are, we are a member there.
That, and Train is a fantastic vehicle for ensuring
that we're all having the conversations that need to be had,
especially around policy and policy development.
And you could see that, um, post the cyclone part
of the, the challenges, um, are the,
I think sector, sector wise.
So, you know, we have a number of large trusts who,
and, and in corporations who, um, run quite large sheep
and beef in the tie down for tea and further south.
Yep. Um, large sheep and beef, a sheep
and beef strategy would be
because scale, it is about scale, right?
And about cutting those costs around management
and governance, because we replicate all the time.
We have use the same farm supervisor,
the same farm advisors,
and it's not, you know, in this environment if you want
to make money outta sheep and beef at scale,
and it's about those input costs.
So being smart around those conversations, I mean, the
in particular is our growing mecca
that in south are our growing mecca.
What's, what's the future going to look like
for future growing in that area?
What, what are we going to do collectively?
The, the development models are there,
we can develop on Maori people.
Often our partners get potential partners
and good partners get confused around multiply owned land.
I mean, I, we don't say that this is UA Maori,
you can transact within hours like anywhere else.
So I think the future partners, just them understanding
that the limitations are, aren't often as big as
what you think the opportunities are greater than the
limitations on Fen Maori Mm-Hmm.
Now not everything needs to make mega dollars,
but there are dollars to be made.
Yep. For sure. But there are, there are opportunities
for people to engage again on that money to Fen for PE just
to run small, small sustainable projects with a lime
and a, you know, like t we trust, again, you ahead
of themselves, but the, the,
the challenges are often espoused in, um, access
to capital, right?
And people say, well, it's easy to say
that good ideas will get funded, right?
Mm-Hmm. And good partnerships will get funded,
but there's a series of conversations both within, um,
the Crown and regional, um, agencies with our tenants
that need, need to happen.
You can't just this group have a chat in this group.
We've got to be better at sharing
and looking at opportunities,
getting your feet on the ground
and looking at those opportunities.
And that, that I think, um,
has improved in the last 18 months,
just having those. So can
I just ask you one supple supplementary question on that?
Um, because I agree with what you're saying.
Um, there is, there is potential, but,
but for those who, uh, the, the model
around when we talk about multiple owners of land are some
who aren't known, um, and the, the Pataka database and the,
and the issues we have around paka, um,
but also they, the model where they have
to have a certain percentage of agreement to do something.
Um, but they can't actually figure out who some,
a great deal of people are that own that land.
How do we, how do we get across that? Mm.
Well, we, we and Martin Martin attends diligently,
Diligently, it wasn't a loaded question, by the way.
It's just, it is, it's something I get all the time. So
Marty, do you wanna talk about the part
because we, we, it's, you know, we meet
with them fortnightly and, uh, do you wanna talk now?
Yep.
Okay. You'll Let me, I'll let you,
Uh, it, the, okay.
The mm-Hmm.
Or the, um, malan court, when, when, uh, succession is,
is granted, um, you, you're not required to provide proof
of identity in that, um, uh, process.
So in that court process, um, uh, so
that's a, a first issue.
So that creates, um, a potential duplication
because the applicant will come forward, uh,
they might use a different name than they've, uh,
previously, um, uh, used might be, you know,
because I'm married or Mm-Hmm.
Names change. Um,
but that creates a, a, a duplicate in the, in the system
as a administrator were
provided with the name and the address.
So for us to contact, uh, that person, uh,
we don't have a telephone number,
we don't have an email address.
Um, they, when they apply to the court,
they're not required provide, uh, proof of address.
So whatever address they provide is, is that a, uh, address?
So as an administrator, you are trying to find
Any administrator, Somebody, first of all,
you're trying to work out whether they're in your system
because we've got a hundred thousand owners
with two 250,000.
So for every owner they've got, uh, two and a half.
And that's expanding, uh, all for the time.
So that ability to contact right at the start for any,
uh, custom administrator duplication
and our system continuing duplication within,
uh, the ma LandCorp.
So, um, fundamentally if you want to deal with this,
then you would run, uh, a share register system just
as we do in every other, other part of our transactions.
Uh, all by land ownership apart from federal Maori,
you're required proof of identity, money laundering, all
of those sorts of things.
But we've got special condition there.
So that'd be the start.
That's, that's not that'd the start of it. Yeah.
That's not the, um,
but from the part of Fen point of view, moving forward,
I mean, ideally any administrator
not having to have the burden of running a database
would be, you know,
we are talking tens of millions of dollars.
Yeah. Not a little bit proof of ID is challenging. Yes.
That's challenging. But the, we are working hard
with the court and with justice
and I think quite successfully at trying to unpick this
and look at that, what I was saying, that that landscape
of land tenure and we are across, across government, across
multiple agencies, we've got duplication. Yeah, yeah.
Um, we could be here all day
'cause it's such an interesting topic, but you
Do see us again Before.
Yes. We'll, but we're gonna go final question.
The honorable Willie Jackson.
Um, just on the, uh, just the final, um,
question, the politics, not, not talking about
politics here, talking about the Maori politics,
that's gonna take it to the end of time
because I think the questions have been really good know
from everyone, really good.
Um, you, those relationships
with iwi are incredibly important.
She absolutely.
And, uh, I, I sort of want to quick update, I suppose, on
where we are with that because you know,
at times they've been your harshest critics.
Oh yes. You, and you know that.
And, uh, and your office has never been particularly
popular, uh, over the years,
and you've had to, and you inherited
All that. They love me now.
They
Love me. You inherited
all that when you came in, you know,
just given, you know, you, you've, you've heard, uh,
you know, a lot of iwi leaders yesterday talking about,
you know, the economic future,
which is, which is really good.
Uh, and, uh, and, and,
and they, they're talking about
that whoever the government is,
what are those relationships like now?
And have you, you know, you know, have you, I suppose,
forwarded some of those critics who, who, who, you know,
who questioned whether the office was really, um,
Whether you need it, Whether you need the office.
That's right. And there is frustration there,
which has been identified today, particularly in terms
of landlocked land being locked,
perpetual leases are absolute frustration.
What's the position now? Do you have an, uh, I can see you
and you're working well with TPK,
but what about that iwi relationship? Oh,
Look, try very hard.
Try very hard. Yeah. I mean, they're, they're busy, right?
Yeah, they're busy. And when it comes down to ua, often
the point of tension is around policy.
So when I say that I want a pathway for owners, regardless
of whether they sit on a iwi database
or not, that causes, that causes tension.
Um, but I've, you know, I've, my job is
to be a professional trustee for those owners.
And so I will keep pushing that.
So it means that in, especially in the long-term, um,
community planning, uh, that this past couple of years,
we are getting more and more interaction in
that regard rather than the straight politics.
So where the rubber hits a road around the, the protection
and enhancing or development of UA Maori
and where an iwi is interested in seeing that move forward
to getting more engagement.
Now whether, whether it's, you know, the, um,
previous perceptions of the Maori trustee
or the current perception of the Maori trustee, you know,
our people, you do one thing wrong
and it takes a hundred years to say sorry.
Right. Especially around UA Maori, especially around
that money to, so I work very hard
at not being soft and having a cry in the corner
and just focusing on what the issue is.
Yeah. What is the issue we are talking about,
where has the Maori trustee let you down?
Because remember, not a lot of iwi entities
of post settlement entities have Fen Maori
and they administer it.
So the first question I like to ask when someone wants
to have the conversation
or when we are going to have a conversation is know, look,
this is the UA within, you know,
this is the cost of administration.
Oh, they're so cheap. Yes, we, we are cheap.
But I like to think that we are fit for purpose, right?
We're a fit for purpose trustee, we value for money
and they get good delivery.
Now, I, I doubt that there are mean, there'll be a few
that would say that that's not the case.
There'll be some that will continually battle
up against the Maori trustee.
Now, in my view, any engagement is good engagement.
Now, whether I'm getting a good telling off
or not, it's engagement, it means
that they care about the Mm.
And my job is not to be popular.
My job is to actually be a professional trustee.
And I take it really seriously.
Politicians Being too naughty.
We're looking for people in the Maori seats at the moment.
Yeah, I was just wondering if we can follow up
with a few questions like by, um, absolutely written, just
because I have some questions just about whanau
or shareholders actually having to buy out,
like land from the Maori trust.
And, um, I've just heard of a few cases of that happening
and just wanting to like, dig into that a little bit
so I can understand it a bit more.
Yeah, yeah, that sounds good.
Um, yeah, this, as you can see,
this is a really interesting topic
and you've given us a lot to think about.
And, um, appreciate your mahi
and the of, uh, what you're trying to do.
I think, um, regardless of our politics, we all want you
to succeed and we all want Maori land to be, uh,
used economically and productively for the benefit of Maori.
So, um, with that, I, I just, uh, wanna say, um, thank you
for coming here today.
We look forward to continuing this, um, and the in December
and um, I think, we'll, your members will be in touch
with you, but no.